2025-11-4
Towards Robust Mathematical Reasoning
Thang Luong⋄, Dawsen Hwang*, Hoang H. Nguyen*†, Golnaz Ghiasi*, Yuri Chervonyi*, Insuk Seo*†, Junsu
Kim*, Garrett Bingham, Jonathan Lee, Swaroop Mishra†, Alex Zhai, Clara Huiyi Hu, Henryk Michalewski,
Jimin Kim†, Jeonghyun Ahn†, Junhwi Bae†, Xingyou Song, Trieu H. Trinh, Quoc V. Le, Junehyuk Jung⋄
⋄Corresponding authors, *Core and equal contributors, †Work previously conducted under Google DeepMind
Finding the right north-star metrics is highly critical for advancing the mathematical reasoning capabilities of
foundation models, especially given that existing evaluations are either too easy or only focus on getting correct
short answers. To address these issues, we present IMO-Bench, a suite of advanced reasoning benchmarks, vetted
by a panel of top specialists and that specifically targets the level of the International Mathematical Olympiad
(IMO), the most prestigious venue for young mathematicians. IMO-AnswerBench first tests models on 400 diverse
Olympiad problems with verifiable short answers. IMO-ProofBench is the next-level evaluation for proof-writing
capabilities, which includes both basic and advanced IMO level problems as well as detailed grading guidelines to
facilitate automatic grading. These benchmarks played a crucial role in our historic achievement of the gold-level
performance at IMO 2025 with Gemini Deep Think (Luong and Lockhart, 2025). Our model achieved 80.0% on
IMO-AnswerBench and 65.7% on the advanced IMO-ProofBench, surpassing the best non-Gemini models by large
margins of 6.9% and 42.4% respectively. We also showed that autograders built with Gemini reasoning correlate
well with human evaluations and construct IMO-GradingBench, with 1000 human gradings on proofs, to enable
further progress in automatic evaluation of long-form answers. We hope that IMO-Bench will help the community
towards advancing robust mathematical reasoning and release it at https://imobench.github.io.
1. Introduction
The field of artificial intelligence, particularly
large language or foundation models, has demon-
strated remarkable progress in mathematical rea-
soning capabilities. Many popular benchmarks
such as GSM8K (Cobbe et al., 2021), MATH
(Hendrycks et al., 2021), and the recently pop-
ular AIME have approached saturation, limiting
their usefulness in differentiating model perfor-
mances. The problems in these datasets often rely
on a limited set of techniques and do not always
require the deep, multi-step reasoning needed
to truly evaluate AI mathematical reasoning. In-
deed, relying on final answer matching, even in
recent benchmarks such as FrontierMath (Glazer
et al., 2024) and Humanity’s Last Exam (Phan
et al., 2025), is not entirely reliable. It could lead
to AI systems that are good at guessing answers
but do not exhibit robust reasoning.
To address these shortcomings, we propose
IMO-Bench, a suite of benchmarks that focus on
robust reasoning at the level of the International
Mathematical Olympiad (IMO), the world’s most
celebrated arena for young mathematicians. The
IMO is selected due to its notoriously difficult
Figure 1 | IMO-ProofBench, a benchmark in IMO-
Bench, for measuring proof-writing capabilities.
We demonstrated high correlations between hu-
man and automatic evaluations on a variety of
public models, including our IMO-gold model.
See §3 and §5.3 for more details.
problems, which require not only rigorous multi-
step reasoning but also a high degree of novelty,
going beyond the simple application of known
Corresponding author(s): thangluong@google.com, junehuyk@google.com
External affiliations: Georgia Institute of Technology (Hoang Nguyen), Seoul National University (Insuk Seo, Junsu Kim, Jimin Kim), Microsoft
(Swaroop Mishra), Massachusetts Institute of Technology (Jeonghyun Ahn, Junhwi Bae), Brown University (Junehyuk Jung).
© 2025 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved
arXiv:2511.01846v1  [cs.CL]  3 Nov 2025

Towards Robust Mathematical Reasoning
formulas. Such characteristics make IMO an ex-
cellent testbed for assessing reasoning capability.
IMO-Bench covers three different tasks as summa-
rized in Table 1 and all problems were vetted by
a panel of IMO medalists1 and mathematicians.
Benchmark
Size
Task
IMO-AnswerBench
400
Get the right answer
IMO-ProofBench
60
Write a rigorous proof
IMO-GradingBench
1000
Grade a proof
Table 1 | Benchmarks in the IMO-Bench suite.
The first benchmark, IMO-AnswerBench, con-
sists of 400 problems with verifiable answers care-
fully chosen from past Olympiad competitions
and then altered by experts to avoid memoriza-
tion. Problems were chosen from a variety of
topics whose solutions require different problem
solving techniques to ensure a diverse represen-
tation of topics, ideas, and domain knowledge as
illustrated in Figure 2.
The second benchmark, IMO-ProofBench, con-
sists of 60 problems of varying difficulty levels,
similar to those found at the IMO. While some
problems have short answers, all require mod-
els to generate complete proofs. The benchmark
is divided into two subsets, basic and advanced,
each with 30 problems. While the basic set covers
difficulty levels from pre-IMO up to IMO-Medium,
problems in the advanced set are up to IMO-hard
level and consist of 5 complete IMO sets, 3 of
which are novel. We designed this benchmark to
steer the community’s focus from final answers
to proofs, enabling a more rigorous assessment
of AI reasoning processes. To ensure consistent
evaluation, we include detailed grading schemes
suitable for both human experts and automated
systems. Figure 1 provides an early look into the
potential of automatic graders for proofs.
These two benchmarks played a crucial role
in the development of our Gemini Deep Think,
leading to the historic achievement of the gold-
level performance at IMO 2025 (Luong and Lock-
hart, 2025). Our IMO-gold model achieved an
accuracy of 80.0% on IMO-AnswerBench by auto-
matic evaluation, surpassing the best non-Gemini
1Together, they won 10 gold and 5 silver IMO medals.
model and the best open-weight model by a large
margin of 6.9% and 19.2% respectively. The ad-
vanced IMO-ProofBench is much more challeng-
ing. Our IMO-gold model scored 65.7%, whereas
the best non-Gemini and the best open-weight
models performed poorly with only 23.3% and
7.1% accuracy according to human evaluations.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that automated
graders for both answers and proofs, built upon
Gemini 2.5 Pro, achieve high correlation with
expert human evaluations.
Last
but
not
least,
we
introduce
IMO-
GradingBench, a benchmark of 1000 solutions
to problems in the advanced IMO-ProofBench,
together with grades from human experts. This
resource is designed to foster progress in the au-
tomatic evaluation of long-form answers. We re-
lease IMO-Bench to the community and hope that
it will spur further research towards advancing
robust mathematical reasoning.
2. IMO-AnswerBench
2.1. Problem Selection
400 math problems were handpicked from various
national, regional, and international Olympiad
contests, spanning across four categories (Alge-
bra, Combinatorics, Geometry, Number Theory).
For each category, the benchmark contains 100
problems across four levels of difficulty: pre-IMO
(middle school or pre-Math Olympiad problems),
IMO-Easy (equivalent to Problem 1 or Problem
4 at the IMO), IMO-Medium (equivalent to Prob-
lem 2 or Problem 5 at the IMO) and IMO-Hard
(equivalent to Problem 3 or Problem 6 at the IMO
or post-Math Olympiad problems). The difficulty
breakdown for each category is listed in Table 2.
Category
Pre-IMO
IMO-Easy
IMO-Medium
IMO-Hard
Algebra
11
46
32
11
Combinatorics
4
19
31
46
Geometry
13
44
32
11
Number Theory
2
20
31
47
Table 2 | Difficulty statistics for IMO-AnswerBench.
Problems with short answers were chosen so
the correctness of a model’s output can be quickly
and reliably determined. Given the proof-heavy
nature of many math Olympiad problems, we
2

Towards Robust Mathematical Reasoning
Figure 2 | Topic distribution by category in IMO-AnswerBench. Number Theory and Combinatorics
have the most topics which reflect the broad knowledge required to solve these problems while
Geometry is mostly skewed towards angle and sidelength computation problems due to the nature of
the short answer benchmark.
perform an additional reformulation step for cer-
tain examples. This adjustment ensures that each
problem yields a clear and nontrivial short answer,
thereby reducing ambiguity during solving and
verification and confirming that models utilize
nontrivial reasoning. See further details in A.4.
2.2. Problem Robustification
To avoid data memorization, an additional step
of problem modification is done via paraphras-
ing, changing the name of objects in the problem
(such as changing point names for geometry prob-
lems), reformulating, modifying numerical values
and/or adding distractors to the problem. This
process is done either manually or automatically
using language models. We highlight some exam-
ples in Table 8 and detail below.
One example is an algebra problem from Aus-
tria Math Olympiad 2017. The problem is modi-
fied by making the substitution 𝑥= 𝑎+ 𝑏−𝑐, 𝑦=
𝑏+𝑐−𝑎, and 𝑧= 𝑐+𝑎−𝑏for positive real numbers
𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧with 𝑎, 𝑏, and 𝑐being the lengths of the
sides of some triangle to obtain the modified prob-
lem in the Robustified column. This modification
uses the knowledge that 𝑎, 𝑏, and 𝑐are lengths of
a triangle if and only if they satisfy the triangle
inequalities 𝑎+ 𝑏> 𝑐, 𝑎+ 𝑐> 𝑏, and 𝑏+ 𝑐> 𝑎.
Another example is a combinatorics problem
from USA TST 2005. From the original statement,
the problem is modified using several techniques
such as modifying numerical values (by assign-
ing a specific value to the variable 𝑛so that it is
harder to guess the pattern), adding distractors
(by introducing a function or variables that are
3
