2026-2-13
Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research
Tony Feng*†, Trieu H. Trinh, Garrett Bingham, Dawsen Hwang, Yuri Chervonyi, Junehyuk Jung†, Joonkyung
Lee†, Carlo Pagano†, Sang-hyun Kim†, Federico Pasqualotto†, Sergei Gukov†, Jonathan N. Lee, Junsu Kim,
Kaiying Hou, Golnaz Ghiasi, Yi Tay, YaGuang Li, Chenkai Kuang, Yuan Liu, Hanzhao Lin, Evan Zheran Liu,
Nigamaa Nayakanti, Xiaomeng Yang, Heng-Tze Cheng, Demis Hassabis, Koray Kavukcuoglu, Quoc V. Le*,
Thang Luong*
*Project leads, †Mathematicians. Work conducted under Google DeepMind.
Recent advances in foundational models have yielded reasoning systems capable of achieving a gold-
medal standard at the International Mathematical Olympiad. The transition from competition-level
problem solving to professional research, however, requires navigating vast literature and constructing
long-horizon proofs. In this work, we introduce Aletheia, a math research agent that iteratively generates,
verifies, and revises solutions end-to-end in natural language. Specifically, Aletheia is powered by by
three main sources: (i) an advanced version of Gemini Deep Think for challenging reasoning problems,
(ii) a novel inference-time scaling law that extends beyond Olympiad-level problems, and (iii) intensive
tool use to navigate the complexities of mathematical research. We demonstrate the capability of Aletheia
from Olympiad problems to PhD-level exercises and most notably, through several distinct milestones in
AI-assisted mathematics research: (a) a research paper (Feng26) generated by AI without any human
intervention in calculating certain structure constants in arithmetic geometry called eigenweights; (b)
a research paper (LeeSeo26) demonstrating human-AI collaboration in proving bounds on systems of
interacting particles called independent sets; and (c) an extensive semi-autonomous evaluation (Feng
et al., 2026a) of 700 open problems on Bloom’s Erdős Conjectures database, including autonomous
solutions to four open questions. In order to help the public better understand the developments
pertaining to AI and mathematics, we suggest quantifying standard levels of autonomy and novelty of
AI-assisted results, as well as propose a novel concept of human-AI interaction cards for transparency.
We conclude with reflections on human-AI collaboration in mathematics and share all prompts as well
as model outputs at https://github.com/google-deepmind/superhuman/tree/main/aletheia.
1. Introduction
Recent years have witnessed rapid progress in the reasoning capabilities of natural language-based AI
in competition mathematics (Luong et al., 2025). Notably, AI models have already achieved gold-
medal performance in the 2025 International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) (Luong and Lockhart,
2025), widely regarded as the world’s premier mathematics competition. This milestone motivates a
fundamental question regarding AI-driven scientific discovery: can AI autonomously discover and prove
new mathematical theorems? Transitioning from contest to research mathematics presents significant
challenges. Unlike self-contained competition problems, research questions require synthesizing
advanced techniques from an extensive body of literature. This poses a major hurdle for foundation
or large language models, which often hallucinate and exhibit only a superficial understanding of
specialized topics—limitations likely stemming from a scarcity of relevant training data.
To explore this challenge, we developed Aletheia, a math research agent that can iteratively
generate, verify, and revise solutions end-to-end in natural language. Aletheia is powered by three
main sources: (i) an advanced version of Gemini Deep Think (Deep Think team, 2025) for tackling
extremely hard reasoning problems, (ii) a novel inference-time scaling law that extends from Olympiad-
level problems to PhD-level exercises, and (iii) intensive tool use such as Google Search and web
Corresponding author(s): fengtony@google.com, thangluong@google.com.
External affiliations: UC Berkeley (Tony Feng), Brown University (Junehyuk Jung), Yonsei University (Joonkyung Lee), Concordia University
(Carlo Pagano), Korea Institute for Advanced Study (Sang-hyun Kim), UC San Diego (Federico Pasqualotto), Caltech (Sergei Gukov).
© 2026 Google DeepMind. All rights reserved
arXiv:2602.10177v2  [cs.LG]  12 Feb 2026

Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research
browsing to navigate the complexities of mathematical research. On Olympiad-level problems, Aletheia,
without internet access, has achieved a new state-of-the-art performance of 95.1% accuracy on the
advanced version of IMO-ProofBench (Luong et al., 2025), according to human experts1. Similarly, on
an internal benchmark (FutureMath Basic) of PhD-level exercises, Aletheia also demonstrated state-of-
the-art performance. Notably, this paper presents and reflects on the initial wave of mathematical
research papers achieved by Aletheia2 in collaboration with mathematicians:
A Reliable autonomous research. A research paper (Feng26) generated by AI without any human
intervention, calculating certain structure constants in arithmetic geometry called eigenweights.
B AI-guided collaboration. A research paper (LeeSeo26) demonstrating human-AI collaboration in
proving bounds on systems of interacting particles called independent sets.
C An extensive semi-autonomous evaluation on the Erdős problems. A report (Feng et al., 2026a) on
a systematic deployment of our agent on the 700 open problems on Bloom’s Erdős Conjectures
database3, including four open questions of Erdős that it resolves, verified semi-autonomously
using both AI grading and human experts. Beyond solving Erdős-1051 completely, our model
drove a generalization which resulted in a research paper (BKKKZ26).
D In addition, the agent contributed intermediate propositions on two further research papers,
(FYZ26) and (ACGKMP26), improving prior proofs by the human authors.
Given the current pace of improvement, it seems inevitable that AI will play an increasing role in
mathematics research. However, for the vast majority of mathematics research results, only a few
experts are equipped to properly evaluate their novelty and significance. This evaluation gap has
enabled misinformation about AI-generated mathematics to spread unchecked in popular media. With
a view towards transparent communication of future developments to the public, we propose codifying
representations of AI-generated mathematics according to a standard taxonomy of “Autonomous
Mathematics Research Levels”, analogous to the SAE Levels of Vehicle Autonomy.
While the ultimate specifics of such a taxonomy should be left to the mathematical community, we
suggest features that would be informative, such as separate axes for representing the mathematical
significance and the degree of AI contribution. For concreteness, we sketch one possible taxonomy in
§5.1, and use it to organize our own AI-assisted mathematics results, as displayed in Table 1. In
particular, this contextualizes the ‘Open’ (according to ErdosProblems.com) Erdős problems that we
solved, most of which turned out—despite being open for several decades—to be quite elementary.4 It
also clarifies that our autonomous results, while milestones for artificial intelligence, are not claimed
to be “major advances” for mathematics (as defined in §5.1).
2. Aletheia agent: From Olympiads to Research-level Mathematics
This section outlines the methodological framework utilized in the development of agents capable
of addressing research-grade mathematics. There are many challenges involved in transferring
capabilities from contest problem-solving to mathematics research. While IMO problems require
ingenuity, their solutions usually span only a few pages and rely only on standard theorems from
the high school curriculum. By contrast, research-level mathematics draws on advanced techniques
1This significantly outperforms the previous best result of 65.7% achieved by Gemini Deep Think (IMO Gold) in July
2025. See full leaderboard in https://imobench.github.io/.
2See our project page https://github.com/google-deepmind/superhuman/tree/main/aletheia for de-
tailed prompts and model outputs.
3https://www.erdosproblems.com/.
4In fact, one such ‘Open’ problem (Erdős-397, posed in 1980) was eventually discovered to be nearly identical to
a problem on the 2012 Team Selection Test for the Chinese IMO team (Art of Problem Solving Community, 2012), a
(challenging) exam for high school students; we exclude it from our classification since we consider the solution to be
already in the literature.
2

Towards Autonomous Mathematics Research
Primarily Human
(secondary AI input)
Human-AI
Collaboration
Essentially Autonomous
Level 0: Negligible
Novelty
Erdős-652, 654, 1040
(Feng et al., 2026a)
Level 1: Minor Nov-
elty
Erdős-1051 (Feng et al.,
2026a)
Complexity Bounds
(ACGKMP26)
Generalized Erdős-1051
(BKKKZ26)
Eigenweights (Feng26)
Level 2: Publishable
Research∗
Arithmetic Volumes
(FYZ26)
Independence
Polynomials (LeeSeo26)
Level 3: Major Ad-
vance
Level 4: Landmark
Breakthrough
Table 1 | Classification of all AI-assisted mathematics results encompassed in this work. Detailed
descriptions of the categories, with discussion and examples, can be found in §5.1.
∗Works listed as Level 2 in this table have been submitted for publications.
from vast literature, with papers often spanning dozens of pages. Human mathematicians, even IMO
medalists, usually take many years of postgraduate study to reach the frontier of mathematical research.
While foundation models possess a large knowledge base from pretraining, their understanding of
advanced subjects remains superficial due to data scarcity, and they are also prone to hallucinations.
Figure 1 | Overview of Aletheia, a math research agent powered by Deep Think that can iteratively
generate, verify, and revise for research-level math problems.
To address these issues, we built a math research agent, internally codenamed Aletheia, on top of
Gemini Deep Think. Aletheia include three subagents, a (solution) Generator, a Verifier, and a Reviser
that interact continuously until a solution is found that the Verifier approves, or until the attempts
reach a preset (hyperparameter) limit. The subagent orchestration is sketched in Figure 1. In turn,
each of the three subagents involves internal orchestration of calls to a Gemini base model.
3
